---
title: (Approved) Language Requirements
description: The original requirements documents for the wing language experience
---

- **Author(s):**: @eladb
- **Submission Date**: {2022-05-28}
- **Stage**: Approved
- **Implementation**: [Language Specification](https://docs.winglang.io/reference/spec)

## About this Document

This RFC lists the *requirements* from the wing language experience, not the
specific syntax/grammer or design of the language. The language design will
follow in a separate RFC.

Each section of this document has a requirement tag that can be used to
reference it in future documents, roadmaps, github issues, etc. The doc also
includes an HTML anchor for each tag (e.g. see
[#w:program-output](#w:program-output))

For example:

> Reqtag: `w:my-tag`

## Overview

The wing programming language (aka *winglang*) is a general-purpose programming
language designed for building applications for the cloud.

**What makes wing special?** Traditional programming languages are designed
around the premise of telling a single machine what to do. The output of the
compiler is a program that can be executed on that machine. But cloud
applications are distributed systems that consist of code running across
multiple machines and which intimately use various cloud resources and services
to achieve their business goals.

wing’s goal is to allow developers to express all pieces of a cloud application
using the same programming language. This way, we can leverage the power of the
compiler to deeply understand the intent of the developer and implement them
through the mechanics of the cloud.

## Programs

When a wing program is compiled, the output is not an executable which runs on a
single machine, it is a set of *files* which are **synthesized** during
compilation by your wing code.

> Reqtag: `w:program-output`
<span id="w:program-output"/>

At the most basic level, the wing compiler can synthesize any file and directory
structure. When used for creating cloud applications, these files are a set of
infrastructure definitions (such as CloudFormation, Terraform or Kubernetes
manifests), Dockerfiles, function code bundles, deployment workflows, and any
other artifact that is needed in order to deliver this application to the cloud.
wing is not opinionated about cloud providers and designed to support cloud
applications running on Azure, GCP, AWS and any other provider. It is also not
opinionated provisioning engines and can support Terraform, AWS CloudFormation,
Pulumi, and any other format.

Let's look at a very basic example:

```ts
bring std;

let hello = std.TextFile("hello.txt");
hello.add_line("Hello, world!");
```

Now, let's compile this program:

```shell
$ wingc hello.w
$ cat hello.txt
Hello, world!
```

Now, let's update our code:

```ts
let hello = std.TextFile("hello2.txt");
hello.add_line("Hello, world!")
```

When we run the compiler again:

```shell
$ wingc hello.w
$ cat hello.txt
cat: hello.txt: No such file or directory
$ cat hello2.txt
Hello, world!
```

OK, this is getting interesting. We've changed the name of the file inside our
wing program, re-run the compiler, and `hello.txt` doesn't exist anymore. This
might not be what you would have expected because in most programming languages,
if you use something like `write_file()`, it would have simply created another
file with the new name.

Let's look at an even cooler example `example2.w`:

```ts
for i in 0..7 {
  let file = fs.TextFile("output/${i}/file-${i}.txt");
  file.add_line("hello, ${i}!");
}
```

And:

```shell
$ wingc example2.w
$ find output
output/0/file-0.txt
output/1/file-1.txt
output/2/file-2.txt
output/3/file-3.txt
output/4/file-4.txt
output/5/file-5.txt
output/6/file-6.txt
```

Now, let's say we change the `for` loop to loop over `0..2`:

```shell
$ wingc example2.w
$ find output
output/0/file-0.txt
output/1/file-1.txt
output/2/file-2.txt
```

Magic! Our compiler actually *deleted* files based on the new definition in our
program.

> Reqtag: `w:prune`
<span id="w:prune"/>

One way to think about it is that wing programs define **desired state**
through files, and the compiler manages these files across executions. This
means that developers are able to evolve the desired state by simply updating
their code.

To do that, the wing compiler maintains a **state file** (e.g. `hello.w.state`)
which tells it which files were synthesized by the code. This file tells the
compiler which files should be deleted across executions.

> NOTE: The state file is not mandatory, and its location may differ based on
> the type of application. For example, if the output of the compiler all goes
> under some `dist` or `target` directory, then the state file is either
> redundant or can be placed inside that directory.

To ensure that users don't tamper with the files generated by wing, all
generated files are always created as read-only, and their hash is stored
in the state file. If a file is changed outside of wing, the compiler won't
override it.

> Reqtag: `w:readonly`
<span id="w:readonly"/>

## Resources

Composition is the key to software abstraction. Breaking a problem into smaller
pieces allows developers to focus on each piece independently and build complex
systems by composing together and reusing pieces.

wing introduces the concept of **resources** as an object-oriented composition
mechanism for desired-state which is based on the [Construct Programming Model],
which has been developed as part of the [AWS CDK] project. The CPM has been
established as a powerful mechanism for modeling cloud resources through code
and have been used to implement other desired-state frameworks such as [CDK for
Kubernetes], [CDK for Terraform] and [Projen]. The [Construct
Hub](https://constructs.dev) is central repository for sharing constructs for
all CDKs, and we indend for wing resources to be part of this ecosystem.

Resources share the capabilities of classic object-oriented classes (such as
initializers, methods, properties, inheritence, etc) but they have a very unique
attribute that makes them suitable for defining desired-state through software -
they have a **deterministic address** across compilations. In traditional
object-oriented languages, instances of classes also have addresses, but these
addresses are ephemral and only apply to a single execution of the program.
Every time the program is executed, each object gets allocated in memory and
gets a new address.

Being able to map a resource to the same resource across compilations is at
the core of the construct programming model. wing leverages the
[constructs](https://github.com/aws/constructs) library which is the base
library used by all CDKs and enables interoperability across the ecosystem.

[Construct Programming Model]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/v2/guide/constructs.html
[AWS CDK]: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk
[CDK for Kubernetes]: https://cdk8s.io
[CDK for Terraform]: https://www.terraform.io/cdktf
[Projen]: https://github.com/projen/projen

### Declaring and defining resources

In wing, resources are _defined_ (instantiated) like this:

```ts
let my_resource = MyResource()
```

> Reqtag: `w:resource-definition`
<span id="w:resource-definition"/>

As you may know, the first two initializer arguments for resources in
programming languages like TypeScript, Java or Python, are `scope` and `id`.
These two values are the key to allowing resources to be composed together and
maintain a deterministic address across executions.

However, contrary to how resources are defined traditional languages, wing
allows you in certain cases to omit the `scope` and `id`. This reduces cognitive
overload and potential mistakes and makes wing cleaner to read and write.

```ts
resource NotifyingBucket {
  init() {
    let bucket = Bucket()
    let topic = Topic()
  }
}
```

As you can see above, when defining the `Bucket` and `Topic` inside the
initializer of `NotifyingBucket`, we didn't need to specify their `scope` and
`id`.

If not otherwise specified, wing will always use `this` as the `scope` and the
type name as the `id`.

> Reqtag: `w:resource-default-scope`
<span id="w:resource-default-scope"/>

> Reqtag: `w:resource-default-id`
<span id="w:resource-default-id"/>

For reference, this is the equivalent TypeScript version:

```ts
const bucket = new s3.Bucket(this, 'Bucket');
const topic = new sns.Topic(this, 'Topic');
```

This works in the majority of the cases, but can also be customized if needed.


To explicitly specify the resource identifier, use the `be "ID"` syntax:

```ts
let bucket = Bucket() be "MyBucket";
```

> Reqtag: `w:resource-custom-id`
<span id="w:resource-custom-id"/>

This is needed, for example, if there are multiple resources of the same type
within the same scope:

```ts
let topics = mut_list<Topic>();
for i in 0..10 {
  topics.add(Topic() be "Topic-${i}")
}
```

> Bear in mind that custom identifiers are still a scope-unique and not the
> global address of the resource. Controlling the global address of cloud
> resources is an engine-dependent API. For example, in the AWS CDK it is
> possible to override the CloudFormation logical name of a resource using the
> [`CfnResource.overrideLogicalId()`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v2/docs/aws-cdk-lib.CfnResource.html#overridewbrlogicalwbridnewlogicalid)
> method.

To explicitly specify the resource scope, use the `in SCOPE` syntax:

```ts
Topic() in alternative_scope
```

> Reqtag: `w:resource-custom-scope`
<span id="w:resource-custom-scope"/>

This can be used, for example, to form resource trees on the fly. For example,
in unit tests:

```ts
let app = aws.App();
let stack = aws.Stack() in app;
let my_bucket = s3.Bucket() be "MyBucket" in stack;

let template = app.synth().template;
expect(template).to(...);
```

### Resource Tree Reflection

One of the most powerful asepcts of the resource tree is that it offers a rich
programming model for reflecting on the tree. The reflection API is available
under the [`constructs.Node`] of each resource, and can be accessed via
`node_of(c)`:

> Reqtag: `w:resource-node`
<span id="w:resource-node"/>


```ts
let node = node_of(my_bucket);
assert(node.scope == stack);
assert(node.id == "MyBucket");
assert(node.addr == "c876fd36dd614e466ada94591af0f00e3600fe3648");
```

The `addr` property of a [constructs.Node] is the program-unique deterministic
address of this resource and used by synthesizers to produce logical
identifiers (such as CloudFormation Logical IDs) which retain across executions.

[`constructs.Node`]: https://github.com/aws/constructs/blob/10.x/API.md#constructs-node

### Declaring resource types

Similarly, when resource types are **declared**, wing the `scope` and `id`
positional arguments are not explicitly passed to the type initializer, as well
as the base `constructs.Construct` class.

In wing:

```ts
resource Foo {
  init() {

  }
}
```

The equivalent in TypeScript:

```ts
class Foo extends Construct {
  constructor(scope: Construct, id: string) {
    super(scope, id);

  }
}
```

> Reqtag: `w:resource-declaration`
<span id="w:resource-declaration"/>

### The root resource

Every wing program has an implicit **root resource** which is the resource
used as the `scope` for resources defined in the main program. 

> This is the equivalent of the CDK `App` construct.

> Reqtag: `w:resource-implicit-root`
<span id="w:resource-implicit-root"/>

The compiler manipulates the root resource based on its **compilation target**.

For example, consider a simple wing program `test.w`, which defines a single
bucket:

```ts
bring cloud;

cloud.Bucket();
```

And after we compile the code with the `cloudformation` target:

```shell
$ wingc test.w --target aws-cloudformation
```

We will get the file `cdk.out/Default.template.json`:

```json
{
  "Resources": {
    "Bucket83908E77": {
      "Type": "AWS::S3::Bucket",
      "UpdateReplacePolicy": "Retain",
      "DeletionPolicy": "Retain"
    }
  }
}
```

Under the hood, the target basically tells the compiler how to configure the
root resource so that cloud resources are resolved to AWS CloudFormation
resources and the synthesis output is an AWS CloudFormation template.

Alternatively, if one would use the `tf-gcp` target, the output will be a
Terraform configuration for deploying the bucket on Google Cloud Platform.

> Reqtag: `w:synthesis-target`
<span id="w:synthesis-target"/>

The compiler is not opinionated about the concept of cloud providers (e.g. AWS,
GCP, Azure) or provisioning engines (e.g. CloudFormation, Terraform, Pulumi),
and users can supply user-defined implementation for the root resource which
implement custom use cases such as multi-cloud/multi-engine deployments.

Initially, targets are implemented via a JavaScript module can be referenced
like so:

```sh
$ wingc test.w --target npm://@acme/wing-targets@^1.2.3/Default
```

> Reqtag: `w:synthesis-target-custom`
<span id="w:synthesis-target-custom"/>

### Asynchronous Finalizers

There are use cases where a resource needs to execute an asynchronous operation
just before the output is synthesized. An example use case is running an out of
process bundler or some other 3rd party code that only has an async API:

> Reqtag: `w:resource-async-finalizer`
<span id="w:resource-async-finalizer"/>

```ts
resource MyResource {
  async fin() {
    // run some async code here
  }
}
```

It is important to note that the finalization order _cannot be guarenteed_, and
finalizers should avoid mutating the tree because of that.

> This is implemented by awaiting the underlying `synth()` method inside an
> async context in the preflight code generated by the wing compiler.

If wing will support explicit mutability, the compiler will be able to ensure
that mutations don't happen during finalization.

> Reqtag: `w:resource-async-finalizer-immutability`
<span id="w:resource-async-finalizer-immutability"/>

## Inflight Functions ("inflights")

wing is a language for defining desired state through software. But
desired-state is not just about configuration of e.g. cloud resources, it is
also about defining the computation logic which executes inside these resources
after the system is deployed (or even during deployment).

In wing, we differentiate between code that executes during compilation and code
that executes after the system has been deployed by referring to them as
**"preflight"** and **"inflight"** code respectively.

> The ability to express runtime logic as an integral part of the desired-state
definition, and naturally interact between the two execution domains is a unique
and fundamental capability of the wing language.

The default (and implicit) execution context in wing is *preflight*. This is
because in cloud applications, the entrypoint is actually the definition of the
app's architecture (and not the code that runs within a specific machine within
this system).

To support this, wing has a language primitive called "inflight functions" (in
short "inflights") which represents an isolated computation unit that can be
packaged and executed later on various compute platforms. Inflights are able to
naturally interact with resources which are defined outside of the inflight, and
invoke runtime operations on them.

> Reqtag: `w:inflight`
<span id="w:inflight"/>

Let's look at an example `upload.w`:

```ts
let bucket = cloud.Bucket();
let topic = cloud.Topic();
let message_count = 4;
let fn = cloud.Function(inflight (e: cloud.BucketUploadEvent) => {
  for i in 0..message_count {
    topic.publish("new file uploaded to our bucket: ${e.name} - ${i}");
  }
});
bucket.on_upload(fn);
```

It should be quite intuitive to understand what the above example is doing. It
defines a bucket and when objects are uploaded to the bucket, it will publish a
message on a topic with the object key.

As you can see, the `upload_handler` is declared via the `inflight fn` keyword
and then passed into the `cloud.Function` as the first initializer argument
(think of `cloud.Function` as an abstract version of AWS Lambda functions).

Inside `upload_handler`, you can see that we call `topic.publish()` which is
part of the **runtime API** of the topic and basically publishes a message to
the pub/sub topic with the name of the uploaded file.

When we compile this wing program, we will get something like this:

```shell
$ wingc upload.w --target cloudformation
$ find cdk.out
cdk.out/Default.template.json
cdk.out/asset.250ffecc3ad9d703e3df52ff035a1ec6ace6d2afaff290c6937b879f0897fc16.bundle/index.js
```

The output here includes both a CloudFormation template (with the infrastructure
resource definitions) and an `index.js` file with the AWS Lambda handler code
and all needed dependencies.

If you dive into the CloudFormation template and the runtime code, you'll see
that the compiler took care of quite a lot of undifferentiated details in order
to implement this application for AWS:

1. Pass the ARN of the topic into the AWS Lambda function through an environment
   variable.
2. Add `sns:PublishMessage` permissions to the AWS Lambda execution policy, with
   the least-privilage permissions for this specific topic.
3. Include the client library of `cloud.Topic` with implementation for AWS
   in the AWS Lambda bundle.

Resources cannot be defined within inflight functions, because there is no
synthesizer and no provisiong engine to deploy those resources.

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-no-resource-definitions`
<span id="w:inflight-no-resource-definitions"/>


### Capturing resources

An inflight can naturally interact with the **Runtime API* of resources that
are defined outside of the inflight's code block (e.g. `topic` in the above
example).

When a resource is captured by an inflight, there is an API that allows
reflecting on the capture, and respond accordingly. For example, the code that
implements `cloud.Function(proc)` will use this in order to identify which
resources are captured by the inflight, and which methods are being called on
its runtime API, so it can wire the desired information and add the appropriate
permissions.

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-capture-resources`
<span id="w:inflight-capture-resources"/>

### Capturing immutable data

Immutable primitive values can also be referenced and captured by inflights. In
such cases, the data will be copied and included into the bundled output as
static values.

Primitive values which include [tokens](#tokens) can be captured, and will be
resolved during deployment by assigning them to environment variables (or other
means of dynamic runtime values).

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-capture-data`
<span id="w:inflight-capture-data"/>

Bear in mind that when capturing collections (e.g. lists or maps), they can reference
resources as well, in which case we need to capture those resources.

Consider the following example:

```ts
let bucket_per_region = {
  US: Bucket(region: 'us-east-1'),
  EU: Bucket(region: 'eu-west-2'),
};

let handler = inflight (event) => {
  let bucket = bucket_per_region.get(event.region);
  await bucket.upload('boom', 'bam');
};
```

The handler above captures the two buckets in the map. However, since the actual
interaction with the bucket (`upload()`) happens indirectly (only after the
bucket is determined from the map), it will be difficult for the compiler
to determine that the `bucket.upload()` call happens on a captured resource.

This might be possible in the future, but requires deep static analysis of the code
(the compiler will have to understand that `map.get()` returns the contents of the
value of the map).

If the compiler fails to determine the nature of the capture, it needs to
emit an error:

```ts
let handler = inflight event => {
  let bucket = bucket_per_region.get(event.region);
                     ^--------- ERROR: map elements must be captured explicitly
  await bucket.upload('boom', 'bam');
};
```

And here's proposed syntax for these explicit captures:

```ts
let handler = inflight (event) => {
  let bucket = bucket_per_region.get(event.region);
  await bucket.upload('boom', 'bam');
} captures [
  { obj: bucket_per_region.US, methods: ["upload"] },
  { obj: bucket_per_region.NA, methods: ["upload"] },
];
```

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-explicit-capture`
<span id="w:inflight-explicit-capture"/>


### Indirect resource captures

Consider this example:

```ts
resource DenyList {
  _bucket: cloud.Bucket;

  init() {
    this._bucket = cloud.Bucket();
  }

  inflight _map: any;

  inflight init() {
    this._map = this._bucket.download_json("deny-list.json");
  }

  inflight is_blocked(name: str, version: str): bool {
    return this._map[name] ?? this._map["${name}/v${version}"];
  }
}

let deny_list = DenyList();
let handler = inflight (event: any) => {
  if deny_list.is_blocked(event.name, event.version) {
    print("${event.name}@${event.version} is blocked");
  }
};
```

In the above example, `handler` captures `deny_list` which is a user-defined
resource. Under the hood, this resource uses a bucket. When capturing
`deny_list`, the compiler needs to implicitly capture the bucket behind it.

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-capture-indirect`
<span id="w:inflight-capture-indirect"/>

### Capturing mutable objects is not allowed

The capturing rules above imply that normal objects cannot be referenced from
within inflight closures, since objects in wing can technically be mutable via
method calls.

> This does not apply to resources because they become immutable after the
> system is deployed and when they are captured, we capture them through their
> runtime client.

> TODO: we can consider having explicit immutability for objects and then
we can allow marshalling immutable objects as well.

This won't compile:

```ts
class MyClass {
  mutate_me() {

  }
}

my_class := MyClass()

inflight fn bar() {
  my_class.mutate_me()
  // ^-- ERROR: trying to capture mutable object
}
```

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-capture-forbid-mutable`
<span id="w:inflight-capture-forbid-mutable"/>

### Static variables within inflight code

It is not uncommon for inflight functions to need to hold state across
executions. In some compute platforms such as AWS Lambda, such state can be used
as a short-term cache.

Inflight functions support this via the `static` keyword (inspired from C):

```ts
inflight fn my_handler() {
  static big_blob := download_big_blob()

  // use big_blob
}
```

In the above example, the `big_blob` object will be defined as a global variable
of the AWS Lambda function and will be preserved across executions within the
same AWS Lambda server.

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-static`
<span id="w:inflight-static"/>


## Dependency Injection

One of the main goals of wing is to allow developers to write portable cloud
applications. To enable this, wing supports defining resources that are
abstract, and only during compilation, resolve their concrete implementation.

```ts
abstract resource Bucket {
  abstract make_public(): void

  make_public_and_print() {
    this.make_public()
    print("boom")
  }
}

my_bucket := Bucket()
my_bucket.make_public_and_print()
```

Now, if we compile this program:

```shell
$ wingc prog.w
prog.w:5:ERROR: unable to resolve abstract resource `Bucket`
```

The wing compiler basically tells us that it doesn't know how to resolve the
abstract `Bucket` resource we used in our program. We need to "inject" an
implementation for it when we compile.

The wing compiler supports resolving abstract definitions in multiple ways: via
the compiler command line, a declarative resolution file or library or via
addiional code (TODO).

Sketch:

```shell
$ wingc prog.w --resolve "Bucket=aws.s3.Bucket"
```

> Reqtag: `w:dependency-injection`
<span id="w:dependency-injection"/>

## Runtime Client APIs

As mentioned above, when an inflight function interacts with resources, it is
only allowed to use their runtime API. One may think of this as the "client" of
the resource which is how it is modeled in many systems.

Let's look at an example:

```ts
bring 'aws-sdk' as awssdk;
bring 'aws-cdk-lib' as awscdk;

resource Users {
  _table: awscdk.dynamodb.Table;

  // preflight initializer (constructor)
  init() {
    this._table := awscdk.dynamodb.Table(partition_key: "id");
  }

  inflight _client: awssdk.DynamoDB;

  // inflight initializer
  inflight init() {
    this._client := aws.DynamoDB();
  }

  // inflight "client"
  inflight add_user(id: string, name: string, last: string) {
    await this._client.put_item(
      TableName: this.table.table_name,
      Item: {
        ID: { S: id },
        UserName: { S: name },
        LastName: { S: last },
      },
    );
  }
}

let users = Users();
let new_users = cloud.Queue();
new_users.add_consumer(cloud.Function(inflight (e) => {
  users.add_user(e.user_id, e.name, e.last);
}));
```

> Reqtag: `w:inflight-clients`
<span id="w:inflight-clients"/>

## Observability

Observability is a fundamental aspect of any application that runs on the cloud.
wing (and its standard library) have out of the box support for various
observability features:

1. **Metrics** - metrics can be defined and reported with syntax
   (`item_count++`).
2. **Alarms** - users are able to define alarms on any metric. The syntax of
   alarm definition is strongly-typed and compile-time checked.
3. **Logs** - logs can be emitted from any inflight at runtime and can be tailed
   and viewed as a single flow across the entire system.
4. **Tracing** - a trace identifier is implicitly passed to all network calls
   and observability tools can leverage it to provide a live trace of the system
   across distributed components.

wing embraces [Open Telemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/).

> Reqtag: `w:observability-metrics`
<span id="w:observability-metrics"/>

> Reqtag: `w:observability-alarms`
<span id="w:observability-alarms"/>

> Reqtag: `w:observability-logs`
<span id="w:observability-logs"/>

> Reqtag: `w:observability-tracing`
<span id="w:observability-tracing"/>

## Opaque Primitives (Tokens)

[Tokens] are **opaque** primitive types which include values that can only be
resolved during deployment. The wing type system has built-in support for tokens
in order to protect users from accidentally tampering with those values.

> TODO: constraints are only during prefligt

[Tokens]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/v2/guide/tokens.html

Maybe we could implement this by having `String` derive from `OpaqueString` and
then the latter will not have `.length` or splitting or reading the contents.^
```ts
bucket := Bucket()

print(bucket.name.length)
/// ----------------^
//                  can't take the length of an opaque value

inflight fn handler() {
  print(bucket.name.length)
  print(bucket.name)
}
```

> Reqtag: `w:tokens`
<span id="w:tokens"/>

## Interoperability

* wing libraries are effectively JSII libraries
* JSII libraries can be imported and used natively in wing code
* CDK resources can be used naturally within wing resources and vice versa
* It is possible to use any TypeScript library within wing. TypeScript type
  information will be used to offer strong-typing.

  * TODO: Use existing docker images/lambda bundles

> Reqtag: `w:interop-jsii`
<span id="w:interop-jsii"/>

## Type System

* Compatible with the JSII type system
* Duration/Size literals (e.g `5s`, `19GiB`)
* JSON literals

> Reqtag: `w:typesystem`
<span id="w:typesystem"/>

## Preflight Warnings and Errors

wing preflight code is executed during compilation. This means that it can emit
errors or warnings during that time, and they will be displayed as compiler
diagnostics in compilation output and IDE tooling.

Let's look at this example:

```ts
struct MyResourceProps {
  max_len: number;
  name: string;
}

resource MyResource {
  init(props: MyResourceProps) {
    if props.name.length > props.max_len {
      throw("`name` is too long (${props.name.length} > ${props.max_len})")
    }

    if props.name.length == props.max_len {
      print("Be careful, your name is at the maximum length")
    }
  }
}
```

Then, say a consumer uses it like this:

```ts
let my = MyResource(name: "hello", max_len: 3)
//                  ^---- ERROR: `name` is too long (5 > 3)
```

This is actually a very powerful and common scenario, when there are some
logical constraints that cannot be expressed via the type system but are an
integral part of the contract (preconditions) for a certain type.

Open issues:

* It should be possible to distinguish between a warning and an error.
* From a control-flow perspective, it makes sense to use something like `throw`/`raise` to escape the flow when there is an error, but not when there is a warning.
* See [construct tree annotations](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v1/docs/@aws-cdk_core.Annotations.html) in the AWS CDK as inspiration

> Reqtag: `w:preflight-errors`
<span id="w:preflight-errors"/>

## Requirement List

<!--
Generated via this script:
cat 0044-winglang-requirements.md | grep "Reqtag" | grep -v "my-tag" | cut -d"\`" -f2 | xargs -n1 -I{} echo "* [{}](#{})" | sort
-->

* [w:dependency-injection](#w:dependency-injection)
* [w:inflight-capture-data](#w:inflight-capture-data)
* [w:inflight-capture-forbid-mutable](#w:inflight-capture-forbid-mutable)
* [w:inflight-capture-indirect](#w:inflight-capture-indirect)
* [w:inflight-capture-resources](#w:inflight-capture-resources)
* [w:inflight-clients](#w:inflight-clients)
* [w:inflight-explicit-capture](#w:inflight-explicit-capture)
* [w:inflight-no-resource-definitions](#w:inflight-no-resource-definitions)
* [w:inflight-static](#w:inflight-static)
* [w:inflight](#w:inflight)
* [w:interop-jsii](#w:interop-jsii)
* [w:observability-alarms](#w:observability-alarms)
* [w:observability-logs](#w:observability-logs)
* [w:observability-metrics](#w:observability-metrics)
* [w:observability-tracing](#w:observability-tracing)
* [w:preflight-errors](#w:preflight-errors)
* [w:program-output](#w:program-output)
* [w:prune](#w:prune)
* [w:readonly](#w:readonly)
* [w:resource-async-finalizer-immutability](#w:resource-async-finalizer-immutability)
* [w:resource-async-finalizer](#w:resource-async-finalizer)
* [w:resource-custom-id](#w:resource-custom-id)
* [w:resource-custom-scope](#w:resource-custom-scope)
* [w:resource-declaration](#w:resource-declaration)
* [w:resource-default-id](#w:resource-default-id)
* [w:resource-default-scope](#w:resource-default-scope)
* [w:resource-definition](#w:resource-definition)
* [w:resource-implicit-root](#w:resource-implicit-root)
* [w:resource-node](#w:resource-node)
* [w:synthesis-target-custom](#w:synthesis-target-custom)
* [w:synthesis-target](#w:synthesis-target)
* [w:tokens](#w:tokens)
* [w:typesystem](#w:typesystem)

## Wishlist

This is a list of features we will consider for wing as it evolves:-

* **Escpae Hatches** - we will consider a built-in mechanism for [escape
  hatching](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/v2/guide/cfn_layer.html) in wing.

* **REST, GraphQL and Microservices** - wing allows developers to define GraphQL
  and REST endpoints using the type system and automatically generate OpenAPI or
  GraphQL specifications as well as multi-language client libraries. wing will
  reduce much of the boilerplate required to discover and interact across
  microservices by allowing two microservices to interact across API boundaries.

* **Workflows**: wing allows preflight code to reflect on the code inside
  `inflight` blocks in order to convert it to definitions for distributed
  workflow engines such as [AWS Step
  Functions](http://aws.amazon.com/step-functions) or [Apache
  Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/). The
  [functionless](https://functionless.org) project is exploring this direction
  with TypeScript. This can also be used to generate things like CI/CD workflows
  such as GitHub Workflow.

* **Web3**: Can wing be useful to build systems that include [blockchain smart
  contracts](https://smartcontracts.org/) and/or compile to
  [Solidity](https://soliditylang.org/).

* **Cloud data structures**: wing will be able to offer first-class language
  primitives that implement data structures on the cloud. For example, a map can
  be implemented using a key-value store, a global variable can be implemented
  using a distributed counter, etc.

* **Frontend development**: Websites are an integral part of cloud applications.
  As such the frontend logic is part of the app. We see a potential for wing to
  expand from the backend to also include the frontend logic and reduce the
  boilerplate and glue that exists today when crossing these domains.

## References

* [Erlang](https://erlang.org/download/armstrong_thesis_2003.pdf)
* [Grasshopper 3D](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grasshopper_3D) - a visual programming language
* [A brief survey of programming paradigms](https://medium.com/@jingchenjc2019/a-brief-survey-of-programming-paradigms-207543a84e2b)
* [Bytecode Alliance](https://bytecodealliance.org/) - WebAssembly
* [Hindley–Milner type system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindley%E2%80%93Milner_type_system)
* [Funarg problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Funarg_problem)
* [Multi-stage programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-stage_programming)
* [Compiler Books](https://twitter.com/mikhailshilkov/status/1492801675068952576?s=21)
* [Comprehending Monads](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/pag/OLD/reading-group/wadler-monads.pdf)
* [Zaplib](https://zaplib.com/) (deprecated -- worth reading)
